Oh
My. Hi. My welcome,
Uh, Trevor.
Thank you for the opening.
Uh, know my welcome to the MAFI Committee.
Uh, really appreciate your time today.
Uh, Heather, uh, Stacy
and Dave Kda, um, KDA to your team
and AMI for coming before us today.
Um, hey, look, we have about, uh, 50 minutes with you
and, uh, this is quite unique in that situation.
Uh, I think, uh, just in understanding,
the Kopa Maori Affairs Committee have been really interested
in understanding broader Maori outcomes
and the accountability across the public service
for achieving those outcomes.
So it is under that kopa that, that, um, uh,
we are meeting today and, uh, we're well aware, uh,
your organizations don't report
to the MAFI Select Committee.
So, um, this isn't supposed to be a a a a interrogation.
Uh, we are just really keen to have a good quarter
or with you about where we're at,
which I think the committee knows we're,
we're, we've got a lot to do.
We've got a long way to go.
Uh, but more importantly, what are the steps we need
to take to get there?
So, uh, know my height and my welcome, welcome.
Um, know my picky, my Dave, uh, thank you
for the work you do at TPK.
And, um, I don't know how we want to organize this.
I thought maybe you could do some brief remarks, um,
and then maybe we could just throw it out
for questions from the committee.
Um, it's really OO over to you. Maybe if I give you
Yeah,
vital.
So, uh, thank you for the opportunity to talk
to you today about this.
We've divided it in into three in terms of
what our specific responsibilities are
regarding accountability for Maori outcomes.
Um, I'll start
and talk through our monitoring role under the Maori
Development Act, 1991,
and how we approach that, how we have, have done
that in the past, and how we are intending
to do that in the future.
Heather will talk about the role under the Public Service
Act and their responsibilities there,
and Stacy will talk about the
treasury's role in terms
of accountability under the PI Public Finance Act
and how that is managed.
And as part of that, um,
I think it would just be free flowing and questions
or at the end, however you want to, um,
play that as the chair.
Mm-Hmm. I'll just start with, um,
Maybe we'll, um, we'll give you guys a chance
to do opening remarks and then maybe
Cappe. Yeah, Cappe.
Um, I guess just
to set the scene, um,
currently the government invests more than $70 billion
on social services across all the social services per Ann.
And while that's well intentioned,
we are not seeing the outcomes that we as aspire
to from this expenditure.
And I've talked to you about this
before in terms of the mason curve
and the fact of that, that $70 billion
that goes out per annum, $35 billion of
that is spent on 85% of the population.
And that's delivered through a top down
through households individually focused.
That is 35 billion to 85% of the population.
The other half, the other 35 billion goes to 15%
of the population, and that 15%
of those with high needs
and complex needs, the government
now is taking a different approach to
how we deliver social services.
And that is a startup in terms of social investment
and looking at what works.
And the intention there is over time
is putting the power in the hands of communities
where government agencies have too often failed.
I'll, I'll, um, shorten what I was going to say,
but the key point I'd make
to you from a Maori perspective is the public service
does not deliver to all Maori.
And if you think of that in terms of the 15%, you can see
that monetary terms around an ineffective
and inefficient spend.
Now, this isn't a new thing in 1986, most
of you will be familiar with the report to ttu,
that was led by John Hoe,
and it was conducted, uh, in terms of a,
a ministerial review on the Social services department at
the time, so nearly 40 years ago.
A key finding in that report, uh, apart from the
ineffective and inefficient delivery of social services
to Maori, was that the responsibility for the delivery
of those services needed
to be shifted closer to the community.
So nearly 40 years later, here we are,
and we have the same conclusion in my perspective.
So in terms of function,
we have a responsibility under Section five of our act,
the Ministry of Maori Development Act to monitor
and liaise with each department
and agency that provides for
or has a responsibility to provide services to
or for Maori for the purposes
of ensuring the adequacy of those services.
Now, over history, we've done a number of things.
Uh, between 1991
and 1999, we did cabinet mandated agency reviews.
Between 2000 and 2009, we focused on programs.
Between 2009
and 2020, we focused on wellbeing and outcomes.
And since 2020, uh, 2020, our approach
has been to monitor,
but also to identify innovative
delivery mechanisms at a prototype level.
So, very small scale.
So what are we doing now?
Well, we will do four things in terms
of delivering on our accountability responsibilities.
Um, we will continue to monitor through data
and evidence, reviewing policy programs
and services, improving state sector effectiveness
and system impact.
But additionally, we'll identify alternative solutions,
and that's aligned with the, the social investment approach.
Um, I'm conscious of time, so I just wanna give an example
of this in terms of what we've done, um,
over the last period of monitoring
and looking for these alternative delivery mechanisms.
And I think of W
and tu, that was a joint initiative between us, a, C,
C, and, um,
to support 800 whanau that were at risk.
Now, of those 800 whanau, there were 341 of those whanau
that had children that were at risk of being referred to
or right on the cusp of, of
those children going into state care.
Now, the prototype successfully, uh,
averted those 341 whanau from potential
or tamari referrals,
but that included 80 whanau
tamari from those whanau, which
were in a position of being on the cusp
of entry into state care based on the cost of 50 K
per ANA per annum.
That re represents a cost saving of 4 million per year
just in that prototype.
And that's an example of how delivery focused attention
through the community to the community as an example of
where we want to go in terms of alternative solutions.
So that's a quick overview of,
and what we do now, if I just hand to Heather
and she'll give a, an overview of what we do.
And then, Stacy,
Um, thank you for the opportunity to be here today
to speak with you on this important copa.
Um, our, our objective coming here as you've,
as per the invitation is ready
to assist you in understanding our roles that we play
to help you with scrutinizing other agencies.
All agencies have a responsibility for improving outcomes
for Maori, and we also have a role in that space as well.
Um, some of this might be familiar to you in terms
of our role, but I just thought it'd be useful just
to go over some of these aspects
and in particular, focusing on some of the things
that are a bit different that we have been trying
to change in the public service to Dave's point, um,
trying things, new things to make a difference in areas
that have not moved for, for many, many decades.
Um, in the, uh, slides that were sent prior,
there was a bit of an overview.
I won't speak to all of that,
but just, uh, some of the accountability
mechanisms in the public service.
Um, the accountability system as a whole is, is made up
of a, a number of component parts, principles, procedures,
regulations, institutional arrangements,
various participants who support public accountability,
a range of legislation, the key ones being, uh,
the Public Service Act, the Public Finance Act,
and Crown Entities Act.
Uh, a number of agencies have monitoring roles
and, uh, in particular, uh, the commission and the treasury.
Um, and that's all part of this,
this wider accountability system turned into the role
of the Public Service Commissioner.
Our functions is set out in the Public Service Act 2020,
sort of in five broad areas.
The first being, um, broader leadership
of the public service to improve services
and outcomes, including for Maori, promoting integrity,
accountability, and transparency, uh, acting as the employer
of the public, uh, service chief executives
reviewing the design
and operation of the system of agencies, so machinery
or government, as well as oversight of the public service,
workforce and employment relations.
Um, each of those have an area
of performance and accountability.
Um, and importantly, we set standards
and expectations of chief executives and the agencies,
and we support them to achieve those expectations
and then hold them to account, um, when they do not
in the workforce, uh, area.
For example, all chief executives have an enduring
expectation to develop
and maintain the capability of the, the workforce, um,
to engage with Maori and understand Maori perspectives.
And that's important because that was codified
in the Public Service Act for the very first time
in 2020 under Section 40, which also, uh,
for the first time emphasizes the important role the public
service has in supporting the Crown
and its relationships with Maori under the treaty.
So that's very explicit and upfront in our, in our act, uh,
and that, so, so the capability
of our workforce is an important thing within the control
of the public service, and that's just really important.
I wanna talk about some of the
things we've done in that space.
Also important, of course,
because in order to improve outcomes, you need
to understand what's expected, um, by Maori
and for Maori, uh, in recent years.
So since the act, um,
we've had quite a deliberate focus across the whole,
the public service and lifting that capability.
Um, and probably for the very first time have done that in a
systemic way, in a structured way
where all agencies have been working
together trying to lift that.
Whereas in the past, it was a bit more kind of ad hoc
and up to individual agencies to do their thing
and sort of optional, really.
Uh, so we've worked very closely at the commission with,
of course, have got a lead role here
on a range of initiatives.
Um, and that includes trying
to attract more Maori into the workforce,
the public service workforce,
and then up into leadership roles.
So now all agencies do have a, a, a clear plan in place
for building this capability, um, based around framework,
and they're required to report
progress in the annual report.
So that's a in important accountability mechanism.
We've indu introduced new, um,
Maori crown modules into a common core leadership
development across the public service.
Uh, and through quite targeted
and concerted action,
we've seen significant improvements in the number
of proportion of Maori in our workforce, uh,
including the senior leadership roles.
So recent workforce data shows the number of, uh,
Maori leaders in the public services doubled
in the last five years.
And about 16.7% of public servant are Maori.
So that's just higher than the, the Maori, um, uh, national,
uh, workforce numbers.
Uh, and in the area of pay
and equity, um, we've more than half the gap in pay
between Maori and non Maori and the public service.
In 2018, it was 11.2%,
and now it sits at 4.8%.
So that's quite a dramatic shift.
So quite a deliberate focus structured approach to achieving
that, that shift in our workforce capability, uh,
in our integrity, um, role.
We've got a leadership role there,
obviously uphold the principles of the public service that
to facilitate transparency
and accountability, for example, we promote open government,
we provide guidance and,
and, um, advice on integrity matters.
And we set standards for conduct and behavior.
Uh, and that is really closely linked to performance
and effectiveness of public service agencies,
which we rely on public trust
and confidence in a high trust environment within
and between agencies as key for our success.
So we measure and we report trust
and confidence in the public service every quarter.
Um, and our results show
that New Zealand public service is one
amongst the most trusted in the world ranking forth out
of 30 OECD countries.
Um, as of September this year, 79%
of New Zealanders trust public services based on their
personal experience and trust in the public service brand is
59%, but we know that for Maori, those,
um, trust levels are much lower.
Do you have that data? Do you have those?
I don't have the specific numbers here,
but there is a strong correlation
between the Maori demographic,
but also social demographic graphics.
But this comes to Dave's earlier point about looking at
different models so that those
who are most trusted in Maori communities are
there in their time of need.
Mm-Hmm. And in, we have more recent experience that shows
that public service is not always the best place to do that.
And so it's a really important, um, point
to make, not to jump in there.
Approximately one and two Maori do not have
trust in your public service.
And, um, and I, I'll just, um, add to that, um,
that's not necessarily because of the current arrangements
and the current public servants that has to do
with 184 years of history, I suggest, um,
and it was something that was identified way back in 86
with John Maggie host report.
Mm, thank you, Dave.
Um, I just wanna talk a little bit about outcomes.
Uh, and this is just sort a really important point.
It's the role of ministers
and cabinet, ultimately the government
to determine the outcomes they wish to prioritize.
Public servants can't do that unilaterally, um,
because that the government determines, uh,
which resources are then allocated to those outcomes
and how they wish to achieve those outcomes.
Public service supports the government
and the delivery of those priorities
with the resources allocated to them,
how those outcomes are defined as quite critical as well.
Um, and a lot of research shows that clear
and measurable outcomes can lead
to improved performance towards them.
So how well it's defined, is it actionable?
That that's really important.
Um, we can point to various sources.
We've got some, um, there's a book that was produced
by some staff from the commission,
which looked at this targeting commitment,
and that does have some good examples of, uh,
government initiatives that have, uh,
specifically measurable aims
that then translate into practical actions, which lead
to the delivery of improved outcomes.
Some of the prototypes that Dave was talking about,
amongst those examples, key point
where there's greater clarity
of the outcomes being prioritized, it's easier
to hold people to account
or delivery towards them,
especially when you can accurately
measure and report on them.
Thank you, Heather. Um,
the last bit I'll just briefly mention is one
of the key roles
that we have at the commission is recruiting,
um, the chief executives.
It's quite a rigorous process that we go through.
They're appointed for a fixed term,
usually about five years.
We, um, set the performance expectations annually.
We review performance against them.
Uh, we have regular, um, engagement throughout the year
with chief executives check in on their progress against the
things that they're accountable for.
Uh, and importantly, we seek ministerial input into the
setting of those expectations
and their, um, the, uh, view on the performance
of the chief executives and delivering on those
government priorities and outcomes.
I'll leave it there because I'll let Stacy speak to, um,
her areas and allow a bit more
time for questions from the committee. Thank you, Heather.
Thank you. Um, Cole, Stacey Wyman got not only,
um, um, hi, I'm Stacy Weimer.
Um, I'm the budget director at the, uh, treasury.
Um, thank you very much for having me here today.
Um, really keen to, to discuss this with you.
Um, I thought I'd just start off
by covering off Treasury's role in public, um,
accountability settings in kind of two parts.
One is our stewardship role, uh,
within the public finance system, and just how well
or not, um, that public finance system delivers against its
goals of kind of accountability and transparency.
Those two things really go together.
Um, and then the second bit, um, if it's of interest, uh,
but I'll, I'll take your lead on that,
is I can just talk about how we allocate resources
through the budget process, um,
and how that works to support accountability for outcomes.
So I'll just really briefly touch on
that piece in particular, and,
and then I can come back if there's any questions.
So perhaps if I start with the public finance system,
I mean, any sense, the public finance system is all about
how do we collect revenue and then, um, uh,
both the allocation and expenditure of public amount money
and how we account for that.
Um, the core legislative, um, underpinnings of
that are within the Public Finance Act.
Um, but the scope
of the public finance system is
much broader than just the act.
So there's a whole heap of kind of institutional norms
and processes that work alongside it.
Um, two really key roles that the public finance system
and the Public Finance Act plays in relation
to our discussion today is one
around parliamentary authorization.
So that provides a framework for
authorizing expenditure of public money.
And then the second one is a concept
of public accountability,
and that's requiring the executive to, um, both articulate
what it intends to achieve with, um, public resources,
and then, uh, provide an account for
what has been achieved as a result.
So, you know, our role in that system is, is about
how do we ensure that, um, uh, accountability for outcomes,
whether that's for Maori, whether that's
for climate change, uh, and anything.
So that kind of very much at that system, uh,
at that system level.
Um, in terms of transparency
and accountability for articulating those, these kind
of three key documents, um, there is, uh,
each agency's strategic contentions, um, which, um,
or commonly known as a statement of intent,
which should set out, you know,
very clearly what's the vision
and direction, um, what are we actually trying to achieve,
what's our performance measures for, um, getting there, um,
and how well are we doing against that or not.
Uh, the second one is, um, the estimates.
So that's part of the budget documentation.
And again, that sets out both how the tax money, um,
payer money is being allocated
and spent in the performance measures upon which that judge,
um, you know, uh, that performance should be judged.
Um, and then the third one is the annual report.
You know, each agency's annual reports.
Um, I'll just talk a little bit about how well
that's working or not.
Um, so an overall level, our public finance system is strong
and it's well regarded internationally,
but one of the biggest challenges
that we face is actually in relation to
that public accountability
and in particular, improving performance reporting, whether
that's, uh, for Maori outcomes, whether that's for,
for any kind, any kind of outcomes.
And there's really two elements to that challenge.
Um, we are really good at saying how much we have spent.
So what is the dollars that we have spent on something,
you know, um, um, as Dave talked about earlier,
but we're, um,
but clearly articulating, you know,
what are the outcomes we are looking to achieve
and how we'll measure our performance, um,
against those outcomes is much more challenging.
And at that level, what you often get is
not a lot of specificity.
It comes back to what Heather was saying, you know,
you just get kind of quite generalized statements.
So it's actually really hard
to see if those outcomes are being achieved
and with the money that you're spending towards them
is actually delivering those outcomes.
So, so one is just about, you know, what we're actually,
uh, measuring there.
The other one is actually tracing the money through.
And, and by that I mean through those, um, documents
that provide that transparency, particularly the estimates.
So, um, you know, actually going right,
what budget decisions have been made, um, through to
how much money has been spent,
and then what is the contribution to outcomes.
And the documents do not make it easy to actually follow
that flow through from money spent through
to outcomes being delivered.
Couple of other points I'd make on that is, um,
the solution is not more and more reporting.
Um, you know, because then you just get into this
overload of reporting.
And so actually being, uh, really clear about, okay,
what are the things we want to report on?
Quite a lot of this, as Heather talks about, you know,
is down to government and their priorities,
but, you know, what are the things
that we want to report on?
Um, and, and
how do we be really clear about are they actually,
is a money being spent actually
contributing to those outcomes?
Mm-Hmm. Um, these messages aren't new.
Um, the, um, um, OAG
and the parliamentary commissioner
for the environment has also made, um,
similar points as well.
So that's kind of in our, our system role.
And, um, uh,
and then in relation to budget, if it's okay for me just
to talk for a few minutes longer, if that's okay.
I guess what we're trying
to do there is encourage people thinking about, um,
the outcomes that they're seeking to, to deliver
through the money that they are, um, bidding for in effect.
Um, and so we do that in a couple of ways.
One is, um, in relation to the budget templates
that agencies have to have to complete.
Um, they require agencies to think about
what are the broader income, um, outcomes.
Um, they also look for, um, these questions relating
to Treaty of Wang implications as well.
Um, and, uh,
and more importantly also just about distributional impacts,
you know, what is the impact of this initiative, um, uh,
intended consequences, but
what are the potential unintended consequences?
So just thinking more broadly than, you know,
this is a good initiative because of this.
What are the other distributional impacts it might have?
So that's from the, um, what we ask agencies
to submit to us.
Um, then treasury does its own assessment, um,
which is focused around, um, value for money
that is not just about, um, kind of, uh,
specific fiscal costs and benefits.
We also assess what are the, um, distributional impacts, um,
can this actually be delivered?
Does it align with the government priorities as well?
Um, so that's kind of, I can go into that in more detail,
but, uh, but, um, uh, that's kind of
what we do in the budget space.
Um, I guess just more
broadly, I'm not sure if this is useful.
Now, I can talk about what I think would be,
actually no, I'll, sorry.
I will stop there and, um,
I'm just conscious of time, so I'll stop.
Yeah. Um, thank you very much. Yeah.
Unfortunately we we're a bit tight for time,
but, um, I'm looking around for questions.
I, I might actually start committee if it's all right.
So, um,
take your, you know, there's a quote.
Um, you can only, um, manage what you can measure, right?
And, um, I take your point, Heather, about,
it's also many ministers that are accountable,
but ministers come and go.
Governments come and go. Your agencies are still here.
And, um, you know, I think, uh,
there's a collective acknowledgement that Maori outcomes,
uh, really haven't improved over many governments.
So I'm wanting to understand what kind of reporting
and data gathering are you doing to understand
how are your agencies, um, monitoring other agencies
and, and, um, uh, uh,
giving the most important data to the ministers
to understand, for example, for public service commission,
how many CEOs are Maori across our public service?
How many leadership teams are Maori?
You know, what percentage of Maori, um,
are in our leadership service for, um, treasury?
It's like, well, um, how much are we spending
to improve Maori education performance?
And it actually, is it making a difference?
So I, I guess I'm really keen to understand what level of,
um, data maturity you, your organizations are keeping
to understand, uh, how we actually delivering
for Maori across time.
Shall I just Briefly speak to the workforce?
Um, data, this is something
that we've worked on proving over the years.
Used to be an annual production of, um, data on our,
and we put it out, uh, publicly.
We now do that on a, on a quarterly basis.
And we have, um, have had much more of a specific focus on
diversity, but including for Maori representation.
Um, but it's not just in the data, it's using that data
to inform us about where we need
to make some changes and where we need to target.
Even though we have increased the number
of Maori leadership roles, um, uh, uh,
and in the workforce, there are some
professions within the public service.
Like for example, in the policy profession,
we've still got some way to go to ensure Maori perspectives
and voices are in that profession as well.
Uh, the other, um, way that we collect data, uh, is
through what's called a public service census.
We did this for the very first time in New Zealand,
back in 2021.
Now the jurisdictions do this on a regular basis.
We are going to run this again next year,
and that's where we, um, get information about things like,
um, uh, how well, uh,
the public service understands their treaty
responsibilities, how well supported they are to learn
to deal Maori and grow their capability.
Um, our first lot of results were looking fairly positive,
um, about 73% of, um, public servants, um,
value to deal their Del Maori and wish to grow it.
And 65% feel supported in doing so.
Expecting to see that shift next year, but we'll wait.
And soon we run, run that survey, um, text again. So that's,
That's our in the workforce.
Yep. Um, so I think, uh, one
of the areas which definitely needs improvement is
evaluation of, um, of policy, um, uh,
policy initiative.
So it's an area where, um,
and this is across the board
that actually there is not sufficient evaluation done
of whether particular policy, um, initiatives, um,
are actually working or not.
So, um, uh, that's probably, uh, you know,
that does create limitations across the board.
Um, in terms of that, just, um, you know,
treasury has a second opinion role,
so we will typically comment on, um,
other people's or other agencies.
So when agencies are putting either proposals for forward,
uh, forward, either through the budget
or, um, through cabinet papers more generally, um,
treasury will comment on those.
Um, uh, uh, so, you know, just to your question about
what data do we hold, actually,
we rely on the agencies quite a bit from a, uh,
from a specific data where it's not fiscal data.
So obviously we have a lot of fiscal information,
but we are reliant more on agencies in relation to specific,
um, data relating to their particular area.
The other thing I just mentioned here,
which is incredibly powerful, is the IDI, the, um,
integrated data infrastructure, um, which, um, we have used,
um, actually as an example when we were looking at a, um,
uh, redeveloping the state housing in, um, um,
and that is incredibly powerful to go, well, actually,
what are the outcomes for different, um, people?
Um, it's all anonymized,
but it is at a, um, at a mesh block level,
so at a very low level.
So you can look at, you know, what are the outcomes
for different people depending upon the
circumstances they are in.
Can I just pick up on your Yeah.
Yes. Uh, suck on that. Just a supplementing on that.
Uh, and it's, um, around the same topic,
but I wanted to use the example that Dave gave, um, that,
you know, if you've got three different agencies all putting
resource into one COPA
and then you have a result at the end, how is that all?
Is there a place to go that
measures the overall outcome from, you know,
input from three different organizations?
Um, I, I think the, uh, answer to that outside
of prototypes, like the one that I've just mentioned,
which is a small innovation, um,
at a government wide level, I point
to the social investment agency and social investment now,
and that's because,
and your question, Dan, was about monitoring.
That's because in the public service now of
that $70 billion we spend,
we can't prove attribution for any program.
That's not just the Maori programs, that's any program
that, so if you mon, if you continue to monitor
and focusing on monitoring the way
that we have been doing it, we will continue
to get the same result, which is, we are underperforming,
but with the inability to prove attribution,
you can't identify what works.
So monitoring is half of the, the issue,
and we have done this for decades monitoring,
but we've never looked at what works.
And the, the key to this are in those, you know,
drawing strengths from our past
and looking at what has happened in the past.
And it's the same thing. It's reoccurring attribution is key
in terms of, uh, how do you prove that attribution,
it's a combination of standards, guidance, and the IDI
and that is where social investment is going.
And I suspect that of that 15%, um,
of the population where we spend half of our
social sector spend 35 billion, that's where
that will come into play.
I think that's really key. Moving from innovation
to a system wide change monitoring is important,
but if I know anything from Ali's experience
over the last decades is monitoring will only
tell you what's not working.
Mm-Hmm. And no matter what I do with public, what we do
with public servants, and, you know, the, the work
that Heather has talked about is important,
but that will not shift the dial on its own
because of trust and confidence.
Mm-Hmm. Because they just will not come.
We saw that in Covid, we saw that in, in, um, the prototype
for tu we saw that in house.
We need to move this at a system level Yeah.
And social investment. To answer your question, I think
that's where I would put my focus.
Yeah.
Uh, we've got a new question from Raymond,
If that's okay with our position members.
Okay. Look, um, thank you everyone. Uh, please.
Um, please don't take
anything personal that I'm about to ask.
But, but I think from learning about how, how deep
and detailed, and actually if I, if you allow me
to say this word, how powerful the role is of, of treasury
and, and, and PSC, I'm just wondering, is there, you
know, is there too much on TPK
to achieve these outcomes when these,
your two agencies can play a much more stronger role in
helping us in this COPA seeing, um, outcomes for Maori?
Um, you know, I'm, I'm just wondering,
and correct me if I'm wrong,
but I'm getting the sense that there's so much pressure
and responsibility on TPK,
but I'm learning that you guys actually have a lot
that you can do as well.
Um, any thoughts about that reflection?
Um, do you wanna start off? There you
Go. And respectfully
Yeah, I was gonna say, you know,
our role, um, particularly Tru you's role
and as I indicated is at that systems level.
So what are the system levers?
And they talked about that as well,
because actually if you get, for example,
if you get better evaluation across the board,
that also helps in relation to mari outcomes to understand
what is working and what isn't.
And so our role is to try
and provide that standard and guidance.
And yet there are certainly some areas
that we get more involved in, uh,
than others, uh, for example.
But that's, you know, when I think about
that's our role there and it's, it's about, um, how do we,
um, support agencies to deliver
as they should be delivering as well.
So Yeah.
But it's that system, it's that system kind of
what are your system levers?
It's, it is a fair question.
It is a fair question and one that we ask ourselves often.
Um, and it is an area, particularly under this government's,
um, setting of the nine targets
where there's quite specific measurable things that the look
to change in terms of outcomes, education
for achievement, uh, and attendance.
Um, it's forcing us as central agencies, including
with DPMC, to work more closely together to,
to join up our view
and advice on how we're supporting one,
the development those lead agencies
and the agencies involved,
how they are preparing their delivery plans, um,
providing assurance up to ministers
and to those agencies on what, what,
whether we think they're adequate, uh, the monitoring
and reporting of progress against, um, the, those,
the progress on those targets.
And it's flowing through a number of the sort of mechanisms
that we have, um, in our gift essential agencies,
for example, in our area, reflecting that through
to the chief executive performance expectations,
and then also exploring new tools like performance pay
that's strongly linked to those targets.
So shifting our, our approach as agencies, central agencies
to how do we, um, mobilize
around these very clear targets set by government.
So if you, if I can just ask supplementary and,
and I'm just linking something you said earlier, Heather,
you said about that survey that was done in 2021 Yeah.
And it's going to be rolled out soon.
Um, I, I was, I was struck by when you said about
what you ask your, um, the, the public servants.
I'm wondering, is there a question about do you know
how big the problem is, as in the people working for us?
Do you know how big the problem is
and how important it is to reach outcomes in this area?
For example, for Maori like that, to me,
that the other things you listed are important,
but there's also like when our public servants are working,
are they going with that, that, you know, for kado in mind
that there's this outcome that we really need to reach
as opposed to all the other things
Mentioned, not through that census.
Um, it's, it's sort of not designed for that kind of,
um, feedback.
Um, but,
but what I would say is that all public servants come
to work every day, like everyone
who works in the public service to make a difference.
A hundred percent. Yeah. For, um, changing those outcomes,
uh, that the, the things that we've talked about, some
of the barriers and clarity about which outcomes
and the resources allocated to it, um, is,
is probably the key, key thing.
And then being able to measure
and evaluate what's working and what's not.
Look, I'll leave it to, to the, to my colleagues.
Um, other questions members? Uh, yeah. Oh, sorry.
Um, Benjamin, do,
Um,
um, Benjamin Doyle, um, I just have a question
around the setting of expectations which you've spoken about
for chief executives
and, um, wanting to understand a little bit more about
how those expectations are set, um,
what they are a little bit more specifically if possible,
and then what are the, um, accountability mechanisms
that are kind of used to follow up when those, when
and if those expectations aren't met?
Hmm.
So in terms of the chief executive performance
expectations, so, um, they're set by the commissioner.
The commissioner is responsible for the performance
of the, of the ces.
We do this annually.
Um, each year we sort of refine
and improve sort of what we cover, um, broadly speaking,
government priorities, how well they run the agency, um,
uh, and then their, their contribution to the system.
So how are they advancing some
of these system enduring commitments like stewardship, um,
building Maori crown capability in terms of the, um,
government priorities, we, um, consult with ministers
to understand exactly what it is that they're expecting
of the chief executive to deliver.
Uh, sometime it's really clear,
like the Prime Minister writes a letter to a minister
and says, your portfolio priorities are,
these will reflect those directly into
the performance expectations.
Uh, we've worked through a process with the chief executive
to confirm and agree that those are the priorities
for them for the year ahead.
Um, in some cases there might be a review
or some other report
that specifically identifies things within the agencies
that they're required to prioritize.
Um, we have performance improvement reviews.
So that's a, um, a process where we have independent people
who come in and look at the performance of an agency
with a view to their sort of four year performance horizon
that might have recommendations about the things
that agency needs to work on to improve their performance.
We reflect that into the performance expectations.
Um, we don't, um, publicize the content
because they are private information between the commission
and their employees.
Uh, the framework of that,
however, I think is available, um, sort of broadly what the,
the components of those performance expectations.
Uh, we have a end of year formal review,
but throughout the year we're checking in on progress.
So we have a team of, are called assistant commissioners,
and they are in regular contact
with the chief executives checking up, up on progress.
Um, so that's sort of the broader, um,
approach for performance manager. Yeah.
Maybe it's just a sub on that.
Is anything specific around Maori outcomes?
So lately, let's just take corrections, a CE of corrections
would, you know, given that there's 60% of our ma uh,
corrections population as Maori,
would there not be in the contract of that CEO, uh,
a specific measurable, um, target around, uh,
reducing recidivism amongst Maori offenders or so forth?
Like is there anything like that in
Our, if it's specifically identified
by the government as a priority?
Yes, we reflected into the chief executive
performance expectations.
Um, as I say, we,
we can't unilaterally say this is, this is what
we want this chief executive focus on.
We have to be clear with the ministers Mm-Hmm.
Um, as to what they want the chief executives
resources to be focused on.
Mm-Hmm.
Stand. Um, so when it comes to sort of that shift
of needs based versus race based, how is
that reflected in sort of
reporting better outcomes from Maori when we're looking at
needs versus race?
Um, Does, does it change to what it, has it changed how
We report? Yeah.
It's, it's not changing how we report on performance.
Right. That I'm, that I'm aware of.
Not in now, not in our space. Yeah.
Okay. I've got a new question from Greg Fleming.
Yeah. It's either a new or a build on the, on the,
uh, recorder so far.
Um, Dave, the, with the, um, setting up
of the session investment agency
and with the clinical being the, the, um, agent, the, the,
that the area of government, which is primarily responsible
for, um, outcomes for Maori, could you speak a bit about
how you see those, um, uh, working together and then,
and how the, the new agency might, um, better support
to Puni ery in the, in the, um, pursuit of these kinds of
Outcomes? Yeah, sure.
Thanks for the question, Rick. Mm-Hmm.
I think, um, looking at what works,
and I gave an example there around too,
but that sits within the wider wau water Mm-Hmm.
Um, initiative.
And so Wau Water has sat within since its inception,
um, and back when it was decided that, um,
WAU Water would be launched,
there was a discussion there about this being a
system-wide program.
And there was a discussion about, um, a billion dollars
being, uh, funneled through, uh, whanau Water for those, um,
in need for Maori citizens to get what they need
and deserve, given the issues
that we've faced over the decades around the delivery
of public services for Maori.
So this was a really innovative solution.
Since then, W Water has stayed within,
it hasn't been picked up wider across the public service.
And the Auditor General spoke about that
and actually put it on to that.
We really should push that harder for it
to be taken up across the public service.
The social investment approach
that this government is taking is an opportunity
for Wau Water to do exactly
that should it meet those requirements.
So what we are doing is making sure that, um,
in the expansion of Wana Water, we align that
with the social investment requirements, particularly
around data being in the spine of the IDI, so
that you can prove attribution.
One of the questions I always get around Maori programs
and water is, um, you know, from people
that may not agree, where you can't prove it.
My answer to that is with every other public service
program, you can't prove it either,
but social investment gives us an opportunity
and for W Water to do that.
I don't think that should be confined to AU Water though,
because there will be other programs if they align
with the requirements
that will come out from the Social Investment agency
to be able to deliver closer to the community.
Because, you know, in this discussion that we are,
that we've been having, one, one of the things I would say
to the committee is, look beyond the public service.
Because if you think about the delivery, 85%
of the population is getting the services
and probably everybody in this room that they need
and deserve through the system, which is top down,
individually focused,
but there is a, a part of the community
and Maori are part of that community that operate as a wana.
They're not individually, uh, orientated
and it's bottom up. Yeah. Yeah. Okay.
Awesome. Thank you so much, Dave.
So, uh, with whanau order being, potentially being,
what you describe as being is there,
is there the confidence, um, within your agencies, uh,
around, um, the, the, uh, in, in, in terms
of the accountability settings, uh, and the,
and the ability, but to measure Wau order to the point
that we could grow Wau order in the way that Dave's talking?
Uh, I think Wau order has provided a, um, successful model
and that's been found in various reviews for,
which could be replicated in other ways.
Mm-Hmm. I think there are some barriers and, um,
and some legislative
and other barriers in the way that we're designed
that we would need, we need to think through,
but more carefully, and I think
the social investment approach
and that agency leading to explore mm-Hmm.
Or open up opportunities for us to, um, have the mandate,
I suppose to drive forward some of those changes
that will make, um, those sorts
of commissioning approaches more readily.
Okay. Available cost of public service, public finance,
that's probably one of the
Areas. Yeah.
I mean, the public finance is actually quite
permissive despite, uh, what people say.
Um, um, but I think, you know, from, um,
from a treasury perspective,
I don't have all the evaluations in front of me for Au Ora,
but you know, what we are looking for is, does this,
is this value for money?
You know, and therefore are there opportunities to, um, uh,
to um, broaden a particular, um, program
or initiative out as well?
And I'd say, you know, um, you know,
evaluations can be some, some, uh,
initiatives have really great evaluations.
So it's quite easy to say, look,
these are actually having an impact.
Um, and, um, and hold people accountable for that.
Some of the evaluations are not, you know,
either there's no evaluation
or it's not to the standard that you'd need
to actually have confidence.
This is giving value for money
and delivering the outcomes that want to
Deliver. Yeah.
Although in saying that,
and um, you know, I don't disagree with
what Stacy is saying.
W Water has been evaluated within an inch of its life.
But the point is, w water, we can't prove attribution
or we can't prove attribution for any program.
Mm-Hmm. In the public service, that's the opportunity.
Mm-Hmm. It's being able to prove attribution
through the emphasis on the social investment approach.
Thank you, Dave.
Um, next we've got a question from, um, Dave Cleod. No,
Dave, I just hear the school bells ring.
So know we haven't got far to go.
Um, um, Kia, uh, called, called David Cleod.
Um, you know,
and now it's never gonna do justice
what this conversation is.
And I've been trying to, uh, listen carefully
and gain, uh, some genes that we
as a committee can take away to improve the situation.
'cause I think there's an immense amount of, uh,
immense might be too strong.
There's, there's frustration with, uh, not being able
to achieve the ultimate goal of what this COPA is about it.
And, um, it's been very interesting to talk, listening
to all the different situations that we've got here.
But I'm still unclear, uh, and I've heard corded
or about, uh, starting right at the very top,
if you could say from the executive arm of our government,
uh, they providing the clarity, uh, that, uh, you need
to then do your job to instigate, um, uh,
employment agreements with chief executives to, you know,
there, there's a whole chain of action here,
but I'm not clear, uh, as a result of this simple hour
that we've had of exactly what we need to pin down on, uh,
to try and make that that difference.
And if there's anything that could help me, potentially us,
is the three organizations.
If there was the number one thing
that you think we could actually take away,
what's the key learning?
What would that be? From each organizations? Mm-Hmm.
We've probably got three. Can I speak to that?
The first one is when you're scrutinizing other agencies,
'cause all agencies have responsibility to ship outcomes,
including for Maori.
Um, asking them are they outcomes they're striving for,
clear are how well are they defined?
Are they smart? Are they specific, measurable,
achievable, relevant, time bound?
Mm-Hmm. You know, so that's one thing, the evaluation.
Yep. So now are you actually evaluating?
So it's, it's again, it comes back to Heather,
the questions that you're asking.
You know, um, what are you seeking to achieve?
How will you know if you've achieved it?
What's the evaluation you've got in place?
And then the transparency piece,
which is always really important and critical.
You know, where will you report this?
So what document will I see this in?
Um, and,
and I think the other thing here is that, um, you know,
a lot of stuff around valuation is demand driven.
So actually if, um,
ministers in parliament are demanding it, that's actually a,
a really powerful incentive to improve that evaluation, um,
and improve those, um, you know, being articulation of,
of the outcomes that are being sought to be achieved.
And the last one's, where's the innovation?
Well, it's identifying alternative solutions
beyond the public service and resourcing those solutions.
Yeah.
Kapa, um, look, that's a good, um, point to end on.
Um, within that context, this is part
of our scrutiny priority for the next few years
around accountability settings.
So, uh, we are keen to continue down this line
as a committee that that may mean we bring, um,
yourselves in again next year
to have probably a longer conversation
and more fruitful, uh, data-driven conversation around what,
what are, what are the specific areas
and the four things you mentioned,
how we are actually progressing.
Um, but I thank you today
for coming on behalf of the committee.
Um, and uh, yeah, appreciate your time.
Yeah, you are done very.